Vision Transformer applied for Time Series Analysis based Prediction of Sea Surface Temperature

Sea surface temperature (SST) is crucial for ocean exploration and research. The impact of climate change caused by SST has a significant effect on the protection and development of marine ecosystems. The development of artificial intelligence algorithms has made great contributions to exploring the patterns of SST changes. Many researchers are devoted to predict SST using Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and achieving scientific advancements. However, the abundance of spatial information in different parts of the image also presents a major challenge to understanding the patterns of SST changes. In this paper, we propose a novel token sparsification based vision Transformer for sequential prediction(TS-ViT-SST), which focuses more on the detailed characteristics of local SST changes, avoiding the negative impact of unchanged parts in the global information. In addition, we also propose a temperature difference loss according to the physical law of SST changes. This limits temperature changes, avoids sudden temperature fluctuations, and ensures the temperature prediction model more consistent with the actual natural laws. To prove the effectiveness of the proposed method, we test the RMSE, MAE, and R2 on the SST-RSS dataset and conduct experimental analysis. We also test some other tasks on the ICAR-ENSO dataset. The experimental results in both cases prove the superiority of our proposed method.
